---
layout: post
date: 2021-01-25
title: Agrelon
author: cgy
---

{% assign author = site.data.authors[page.author]%}
{{author.name}}

ORCID: <a href="https://orcid.org/{{ author.orcid }}" title="{{author.name}}">{{author.orcid}}</a>

Choosing an ontology is always a difficult task (see [Triplestores,
Ontologies, and Reasoning]({% post_url
2020-06-22-Triplestores-Onotologies-Reasoning %})).  There are many
different considerations to make.  Among them is: availability,
suitability for the dataset, and complexity.  There is also the ever
present pull of writing an ontology for your data from scratch, which
is often best avoided but is always a temptation.

For IrishGen, I decided early on to use the [Relationship
ontology](http://purl.org/vocab/relationship/).  This was due to the
fact that it covered most of what was necessary and any additional
predicates needed or any adjustments could be incorporated in a
follow-on ontology.  Moreover, the Relationship ontology was built on
top of the very well-known and universally used [Foaf
ontology](http://xmlns.com/foaf/0.1/).

In the course of the development of IrishGen, more predicates needed
to be added to cover some more areas that the Relationship ontology
did not.  Additional tweaks were also needed to make the `parentOf`
relation into a subproperty of the `ancestorOf` predicate (and
inversely for the `childOf`) as this would not allow transitivity
backwards (also remember that your parents are your ancestors as
well).

In private email conversations with other individuals who are
interested in the Semantic Web and Linked Data, a serious flaw in the
way in which the Relationship ontology uses `owl:equivalentClass` was
brought to my attention.  They proposed that IrishGen use an ontology
for people and institutions which was developed separately by them and
addressed the problem, called
[Agrelon](https://d-nb.info/standards/elementset/agrelon).  Then as
now, switching from using the Relationship ontology to using Agrelon
would involve a lot of work so I politely declined.  However, I kept
the idea in my mind.

While working with Stardog, you will notice that some queries are just
plain slow.  There is an example of this with Stardog in [Making
IrishGen SPARQL Part II: Constructs]({% post_url
2020-08-05-Making-IrishGen-SPARQL-Part-II%}) where a Construct query
would take 21 seconds to run when it would not be expected to take
that long.  This was a constant irritant in other queries as well and
I preferred Stardog's strict adherence to standards.  So, in a fit of
aggravation, I did a quick and dirty transformation of IrishGen from
the Relationship ontology to Agrelon as I remembered the flaw that my
email conversation earlier had pointed out.  In the case that I was
working with, I got a massive speed boost to the query.  This boosted
my motivation to attempt the integration of Agrelon into IrishGen.

The more interested among you may have noticed that in the `utils`
directory in the IrishGen repository has gained the Python file
[`irish_gen_add_agrelon.py`](https://github.com/cyocum/irish-gen/blob/master/utils/irish_gen_add_agrelon.py).

This Python script will, with the proper libraries installed (see code
for details), add Agrelon to an IrishGen TRiG file.  A user can now
run this against some or all of IrishGen to add Agrelon predicates to
IrishGen.  Also, I learned a few things about Agrelon while writing
the script.  For instance, Agrelon contains many of the relations that
the Relationship ontology lacked and needed to be added by IrishGen
(including the ancestor tweak mentioned above) which means less work
on the part of IrishGen to maintain the special ontologies.

However, the reader may notice that I used a script to add the
possibility of using Agrelon rather than adding Agrelon directly to
the IrishGen TRiG files.  There is a formal limitation to using the
Python script to add Agrelon.  The formal limitation is that Graphs
have no natural ordering.  This might not seem like an impediment but
IrishGen's files generally follow the order of the text that they
transform.  A user should be able to read the IrishGen file and follow
along from the original source material.  If the script was run and
the files checked in directly from that, the the link between the
order of the source text and the ordering of the corresponding file
would be lost and visual auditing by a human would become
prohibitively frustrating and time consuming.  Reordering the files by
hand after running the script would be a prohibitive amount of work
without many more people willing to become involved.

As for the speed issue, when using GraphDB, it is much less of a
concern because of the fact that GraphDB does forward-chaining which
calculates all the implications of the ontologies and then puts that
on disk.  This means that Agrelon's speed boost is only really good
for backwards-chaining systems like Stardog, where the implications of
the ontologies are only worked out when the query is executed.  The
Relationship ontology's flaw still exists, of course, but it does not
interfere with the regular use of IrishGen so it less of a concern.

I would recommend giving the Agrelon ontology a try and comparing it
with the Relationship ontology.
