---
layout: post
date: 2021-10-30
title: Auditing
author: cgy
---

{% assign author = site.data.authors[page.author]%}
{{author.name}}

ORCID: <a href="https://orcid.org/{{ author.orcid }}" title="{{author.name}}">{{author.orcid}}</a>

While working on the [latest
release](https://github.com/cyocum/irish-gen/releases/tag/20211030.1)
of IrishGen, I had the chance to revisit a decision made earlier in
the project's history.  In this case, it involved the [_Genelach
Clainde
Cernaig_](https://celt.ucc.ie//published/G800011F/text045.html) from
the Book of Leinster.  In fact the entry is so small, I will copy and
paste it here so I can discuss it in full.  You can also see the file
on IrisGen in the file `clainde_cernaig.trig` (click
[here](https://github.com/cyocum/irish-gen/blob/master/LL/clainde_cernaig.trig)).

> Cummascach m Cernaig m Mael Chiarain m Eochach m Cernaig m Echdach m Cummascaig m Ailella.

> Da mc Ailella m Cummascaig m Cernaig m Shubne m Ecnig m Colgan m Suibne m Rónain.

> Et Fer Dá Chrích m Suibne m Crundmael m Ronain m Baetain m Muridaig.


The first sentence is an unremarkable String Genealogy. The problem
lies in the first word of the second sentence: Da.  This could be one
of two things: the name of an individual or the numeral: two.  [Eystein
Thanisch](https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2819-5519) helpfully points this
out in a comment in the file.  Additionally, he indicates Laud Misc
610 which also contains a version of this string genealogy, which is
also short and can be copied and pasted here from the
[file](https://celt.ucc.ie/published/G105005/):

> Cummascach m. Cernaig m. Máilchíaráin m. Eochach m. Cernaig m. Echach m. Cumascaig m. Ailella (ocus Lorcán m. Ailella dá mac Ailella) m. Cumascaig m. Cernaig m. Suibne m. Éicnig m. Colcan m. Suibne m. Rónaín (ocus Fer dá crích) m. Suibne m. Cruindmáil m. Rónáin m. Baetáin.

Again this is a rather unremarkable String Genealogy.  You can see the
IrishGen file
[here](https://github.com/cyocum/irish-gen/blob/master/Laud_Misc_610/CGH/de_genelach_cloinne_cernaig_in_so.trig).
Although, you can see how this was interpreted by the compilers of
Laud Misc 610.  Many of the same indivuduals are used but the entire
line is smoothed out into one single line of descent with individuals
added at certain points.  A second look at the Laudo Misc 610 line
will also show that the compiliers of Laud Misc 610 believe that
Allela has two sons: "Ailella (ocus Lorcán m. Ailella dá mac Ailella)"
in this case Lorcán and Cumascaig.  Returning to the Book of Leinster
version, you will notice that Lorcán is not mentioned.

At this point, you might think that evidence from Laud Misc 610 would
lend weight to the position that Aillil had two sons.  Sadly, the Book
of Leinster is from the 12th century while Laud Misc 610 is from the
15th century.  There is plenty of time for someone to change the
genealogy in transmission or change it deliberately for their own
reasons.  Genealogies were political documents and were changed,
revised, and updated with new information all the time.

When faced with an interpretation like this, it can be helpful to look
at the manuscript directly.  Thankfully both manuscripts have been
digitized and are available online.  You can see Laud Misc 610 version
of the geneaology
[here](https://digital.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/objects/cb909a51-5acd-4fee-95ec-51ff09b87676/surfaces/2d84d4dc-58c3-43b1-a232-4d3cca7ae04a/)
in the upper right hand corner and eleven lines down.  You can see the
Book of Leinster version
[here](https://www.isos.dias.ie/libraries/TCD/TCD_MS_1339/tables/17.html#333)
with the entry in about the middle of the page in column b.

Looking at the manuscript, you will notice that some of the initial
letters are filled in with red pigment.  This often indicates the
beginning of a sentence or line.  While this often gives clues as to
the interpretation of a line, in this case, it cannot tell us much as
all the beginning letters of lines are filled in and not just names.

Another way to look at it is to look further along to "Et Fer Dá
Chrích m Suibne...".  Does the conjunction "et" indicate that Fer Dá
Chrích has a brother or does it mean that there is another line in the
genealogy?  Looking at the manuscript context, "et" does not seem
marked out specally or in any way indicated as special in some way.
It seems for now that "et" is just "and this line as well".

For now, unless someone comes up with a better arrangement of facts (a
new argument that has better explanitory force) or new, over-looked
facts that would resolve this, Da will remain a son of Aillil inside
IrishGen.
