---
layout: post
date: 2021-01-23
title: Agrelon
author: cgy
---

Choosing an ontology is always a difficult task.  There are many
different considerations to make.  Among them is: availability,
suitability for the dataset, and complexity.  There is also the ever
present pull of writing an ontology for your data from scratch, which
is often best avoided but is always a temptation.

For IrishGen, I decided early on to use the [Relationship
ontology](http://purl.org/vocab/relationship/).  This was due to the
fact that it covered most of what was necessary and any additional
predicates needed or any adjustments could be incorporated in a
follow on ontology.  Moreover, the Relationship ontology was built on
top of the very well-known and universally used [Foaf
ontology](http://xmlns.com/foaf/0.1/).

In the course of development of IrishGen, more predicates needed to be
added to cover some more areas that the Relationship ontology did not.
Additional tweaks were also made to make the `parentOf` relation a
subproperty of the `ancestorOf` predicate (and inversely for the
`childOf`) as this would not allow transitivity backwards (also
remember that your parents are your ancestors who just happen to still
be alive).

In private email conversations with Lars Svensson of the Deutsche
Nationalbibliothek, he brought to my attention that there is a serious
flaw in the way in which the Relationship ontology uses
`owl:equivalentClass`.  He proposed that IrishGen use the ontology for
people and institutions which was developed there, called
[Agrelon](https://d-nb.info/standards/elementset/agrelon).  Then as
now, switching from using the Relationship ontology to using Agrelon
would involve a lot of work so I politely declined.  However, I kept
the idea in my mind.

While working with Stardog, you will notice that some queries are just
plain slow.  This was a constant irritant as I preferred Stardog's
strict adherence to standards.  So, in a fit of aggravation, I did a
quick and dirty transformation of IrishGen from the Relationship
ontology to Agrelon as I remembered the flaw that Lars had pointed out.
In the case that I was working with, I got a massive speed boost to
the query.  This gave me a boost in attempting to integrate Agrelon
into IrishGen.

The more interested among you may have noticed that in the `utils`
directory in the IrishGen repository has gained the Python file
[`irish_gen_add_agrelon.py`](https://github.com/cyocum/irish-gen/blob/master/utils/irish_gen_add_agrelon.py).
This Python script will, with the proper libraries installed (see code
for details), add Agrelon to an IrishGen TRiG file.  A user can now
run this against one or all of IrishGen to add Agrelon predicates to
IrishGen.  Also, I learned a few things about Agrelon while writing
the script.  For instance, Agrelon contains many of the relations that
the Relationship ontology lacked and needed to be added by IrishGen
(including the ancestor tweak mentioned above) which means less work
on the part of IrishGen to maintain the special ontologies.

However, the reader may notice that I used a script to add the
possibility of using Agrelon rather than adding Agrelon directly.
There is a formal limitation to using the Python script to add
Agrelon.  The formal limitation is that Graphs have no natural
ordering.  This might not seem like an impediment but IrishGen's files
generally follow the text that they transform.  A user should be able
to read the IrishGen file and follow along from the original source
material.  If the script was run and the files checked in directly
from that, the lexical ordering of the files would be lost and visual
auditing by a human would become prohibitively frustrating.
Reordering the files by hand after running the script would be a
prohibitive amount of work without many more people willing to become
involved.

As for the speed issue, when using GrahDB, it is much less of an issue
because of the fact that GraphDB does forward-chaining which
calculates all the implications of the ontologies then puts that on
disk.  This means that Agrelon's speed boost is only really good for
backwards-chaining systems like Stardog, where the implications of the
ontologies are only worked out when the query is executed.  The
Relationship ontology's flaw still exists, of course, but it does not
interfere with the regular use of IrishGen so it less of a concern.

I would recommend giving the Agrelon ontology a try and compare it
with the Relationship ontology.
